README.md, before:

# Labspace Infra

This repository provides the infrastructure and components required to run Labspaces.

![Screenshot of the project opened in the browser using VS Code server](./screenshot.png)

## Try it out

To try out a Labspace, run the following command and then open your browser to [localhost:3030](http://localhost:3030):

### Starting for Mac users

Open a terminal and run the following command:

```bash
export CONTENT_REPO_URL=https://github.com/mikesir87/labspace-docker-overview 
docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace up -y
```

### Starting for Windows users

Open a PowerShell and run the following command:

```powershell
$Env:CONTENT_REPO_URL = "https://github.com/mikesir87/labspace-docker-overview"
docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace up -y
```

### Viewing the Labspace

Once the containers have started, open your browser to http://localhost:3030 and you’ll see the Labspace!



## Architecture

A Labspace can be thought of as two types of materials coming together: **infrastructure** and **content**.

### Infrastructure architecture

Several components and services are brought together to provide the infrastructure for a Labspace.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    classDef containerNode fill:#2560FF,color:#fff

    subgraph VSCodeServer[VS Code Server container]
        project@{ shape: odd, label: "/home/coder/project" }
        socket@{ shape: odd, label: "/var/run/docker.sock" }

        subgraph Shared Network Namespace
            PortRepublisher[Port republisher container]:::containerNode
        end
    end

    VSCodeServer:::containerNode

    Setup[Labspace configurator]:::containerNode -->|Clones content repo and puts it into| Volume@{ shape: cyl, label: "Labspace\ncontent volume" }

    Volume --> |Mounted into| Interface[Labspace interface]:::containerNode
    Volume --> |Mounted at| project

    SocketVolume -->|Mounted into| PortRepublisher

    HostProxy@{ shape: odd, label: "Host engine socket" } --> |Mounted into|ProxyContainer
    ProxyContainer[Socket Proxy]:::containerNode -->|Stores proxy-enabled socket into| SocketVolume@{ shape: cyl, label: "Docker socket\nvolume" }
    SocketVolume -->|Mounted at| socket

    SocketVolume -->|Mounted into| WorkspaceCleaner[Workspace cleaner]:::containerNode
```

- **Interface** - provides the split-screen interface that renders the Labspace instructions and VS Code
- **VS Code Server** - extends the [coder/code-server](https://github.com/coder/code-server) project to provide VS Code in a browser, pre-configured with tooling to support a Docker-focused lab environment
- **Configurator** - clones the repo and puts it into a volume that is then shared with the VS Code server.
- **[Docker Socket Proxy](https://github.com/mikesir87/docker-socket-proxy)** - wraps the Docker Socket to put various protections/remappings in place. Specifically:
  - Docker commands will only return the items created by this environment (newly created items are mutated with a label and object responses filter on that label)
  - Mounts in new containers are only allowed from within the project
  - Mount source paths are remapped to the volume the files are found in (even if using relative paths)
  - Requests to start a new container with the Docker socket will be remapped to use the proxied socket. This ensures Testcontainers config also uses the remapping, etc.
- **Host Port Republisher** - this container runs in the same network namespace as the VS Code Server and watches for container start/stop events that have published ports. It then starts socat processes to allow the forwarding of localhost ports to the container.
    - Example: start a postgres container in the IDE terminal, publishing the port. With this, you can then connect to it using `psql -h localhost` without using host network mode (which isn't always available)

### Content architecture

The _content_ for a Labspace is sourced from a git repository.

At the root of the repository is a `labspace.yaml` that defines the Labspace. The following is an example:

```yaml
title: Sample Labspace
description: >
  This Labspace is an example and this description would appear in the header under the title.

sections:
# - title: The name/title of the section. This will appear in the dropdowns and used to generate an "id" of the section (for navigation, etc.)
#   contentPath: The path to the Markdown file, relative to the root of the repository
  - title: Section number one
    contentPath: ./path/to/section-one.md
  - title: The second section
    contentPath: ./section-two.md
```

The markdown files support all GitHub-flavored Markdown. Any `bash`, `sh`, or `console` code blocks will automatically be given a "Run" button to easily run the command in the VS Code editor.

## Development

"Development" largely depends on what type of development you are trying to do - work on the Labspace infrastructure or writing Labspace content.

### Labspace infra development

To work on the Labspace infrastructure, you can utilize the `compose.yaml` file. Make sure to enable Compose Watch mode with the `--watch` flag.

```console
docker compose up --watch --build
```

After it starts, open the interface at http://localhost:5173.

### Labspace content development

If you want to make a Labspace, follow these steps:

1. Create a repo or folder that will store your Labspace

2. Create a `labspace.yaml` that defines the Labspace. See the example at [`./sample-content-repo/labspace.yaml`](./sample-content-repo/labspace.yaml).

3. Start a Labspace in "dev mode". This will mount the content, rather than fetch it, and configure the interface to poll for content changes.

    ```console
    # On Mac
    CONTENT_PATH=$PWD docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace-content-dev up

    # On Windows with PowerShell
    $Env:CONTENT_PATH = (Get-Location).Path; docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace-content-dev up
    ```
4. Open http://localhost:3030 to open the interface

5. Write your content as you wish! You should see the changes reflected in the interface shortly after saving any file changes.


## Known limitations

- Running multiple Labspaces concurrently is not supported at this time on the same machine
- Volume names are currently hard-coded in the Compose file (for remapping/allowlisting of mount sources)

Commit message:

Move host port republishing from separate service to support extension
Resolves #68

README.md, after:

# Labspace Infra

This repository provides the infrastructure and components required to run Labspaces.

![Screenshot of the project opened in the browser using VS Code server](./screenshot.png)

## Try it out

To try out a Labspace, run the following command and then open your browser to [localhost:3030](http://localhost:3030):

### Starting for Mac users

Open a terminal and run the following command:

```bash
export CONTENT_REPO_URL=https://github.com/mikesir87/labspace-docker-overview 
docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace up -y
```

### Starting for Windows users

Open a PowerShell and run the following command:

```powershell
$Env:CONTENT_REPO_URL = "https://github.com/mikesir87/labspace-docker-overview"
docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace up -y
```

### Viewing the Labspace

Once the containers have started, open your browser to http://localhost:3030 and you’ll see the Labspace!



## Architecture

A Labspace can be thought of as two types of materials coming together: **infrastructure** and **content**.

### Infrastructure architecture

Several components and services are brought together to provide the infrastructure for a Labspace.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    classDef containerNode fill:#2560FF,color:#fff

    subgraph VSCodeServer[VS Code Server container]
        project@{ shape: odd, label: "/home/coder/project" }
        socket@{ shape: odd, label: "/var/run/docker.sock" }
    end

    VSCodeServer:::containerNode

    Setup[Labspace configurator]:::containerNode -->|Clones content repo and puts it into| Volume@{ shape: cyl, label: "Labspace\ncontent volume" }

    Volume --> |Mounted into| Interface[Labspace interface]:::containerNode
    Volume --> |Mounted at| project

    HostProxy@{ shape: odd, label: "Host engine socket" } --> |Mounted into|ProxyContainer
    ProxyContainer[Socket Proxy]:::containerNode -->|Stores proxy-enabled socket into| SocketVolume@{ shape: cyl, label: "Docker socket\nvolume" }
    SocketVolume -->|Mounted at| socket

    SocketVolume -->|Mounted into| WorkspaceCleaner[Workspace cleaner]:::containerNode
```

- **Interface** - provides the split-screen interface that renders the Labspace instructions and VS Code
- **VS Code Server** - extends the [coder/code-server](https://github.com/coder/code-server) project to provide VS Code in a browser, pre-configured with tooling to support a Docker-focused lab environment
- **Configurator** - clones the repo and puts it into a volume that is then shared with the VS Code server.
- **[Docker Socket Proxy](https://github.com/mikesir87/docker-socket-proxy)** - wraps the Docker Socket to put various protections/remappings in place. Specifically:
  - Docker commands will only return the items created by this environment (newly created items are mutated with a label and object responses filter on that label)
  - Mounts in new containers are only allowed from within the project
  - Mount source paths are remapped to the volume the files are found in (even if using relative paths)
  - Requests to start a new container with the Docker socket will be remapped to use the proxied socket. This ensures Testcontainers config also uses the remapping, etc.
- **VS Code extension** - a custom VS Code extension that provides additional support and functionality in the system, including:
  - Support the "Run" button from the interface to send commands to run in the terminal
  - Host port republisher - watches for containers that are publishing ports and sets up socat proxies to enable direct communication using localhost inside the environment

### Content architecture

The _content_ for a Labspace is sourced from a git repository.

At the root of the repository is a `labspace.yaml` that defines the Labspace. The following is an example:

```yaml
title: Sample Labspace
description: >
  This Labspace is an example and this description would appear in the header under the title.

sections:
# - title: The name/title of the section. This will appear in the dropdowns and used to generate an "id" of the section (for navigation, etc.)
#   contentPath: The path to the Markdown file, relative to the root of the repository
  - title: Section number one
    contentPath: ./path/to/section-one.md
  - title: The second section
    contentPath: ./section-two.md
```

The markdown files support all GitHub-flavored Markdown. Any `bash`, `sh`, or `console` code blocks will automatically be given a "Run" button to easily run the command in the VS Code editor.

## Development

"Development" largely depends on what type of development you are trying to do - work on the Labspace infrastructure or writing Labspace content.

### Labspace infra development

To work on the Labspace infrastructure, you can utilize the `compose.yaml` file. Make sure to enable Compose Watch mode with the `--watch` flag.

```console
docker compose up --watch --build
```

After it starts, open the interface at http://localhost:5173.

### Labspace content development

If you want to make a Labspace, follow these steps:

1. Create a repo or folder that will store your Labspace

2. Create a `labspace.yaml` that defines the Labspace. See the example at [`./sample-content-repo/labspace.yaml`](./sample-content-repo/labspace.yaml).

3. Start a Labspace in "dev mode". This will mount the content, rather than fetch it, and configure the interface to poll for content changes.

    ```console
    # On Mac
    CONTENT_PATH=$PWD docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace-content-dev up

    # On Windows with PowerShell
    $Env:CONTENT_PATH = (Get-Location).Path; docker compose -f oci://dockersamples/labspace-content-dev up
    ```
4. Open http://localhost:3030 to open the interface

5. Write your content as you wish! You should see the changes reflected in the interface shortly after saving any file changes.


## Known limitations

- Running multiple Labspaces concurrently is not supported at this time on the same machine
- Volume names are currently hard-coded in the Compose file (for remapping/allowlisting of mount sources)
